linux/blog.md, before:

# Linux

In this post I am going to share my experiences about learning how to program in GNU/Linux
and why I think it is the best environment for that. Upfront I want to say that my
intention is not to express that my development environment is better than yours.
I have tried a couple of IDEs but they never quite left me satisfied. If you already
have invested a lot of time and effort to be productive in your IDE of choosing I
don't see a reason for you to switch to something else unless you wanted to try
something new for yourselft perhaps for the experience of getting an idea of how
other developers prefer to work.

I remember that when I was a student some of my classmates mentioned that software
developers prefered to write code in Linux, though I can only remember that not the
reasons. Around that time I was writing Matlab code in Windows and was satisfied
with my development experience, did not feel that I was missing out on anything.
I was able to solve the engineering problems that required the application of
numerical techniques quite fast thanks to Matlab's numerical optimization toolbox
mostly by using Matlab's editor and running the code by interacting with the Graphical
User Interface GUI.
For me it just happened that I had to learn Linux to be able to conduct
my research work in a High Performance Computing HPC cluster. The problems that I
had to solve then were larger in scale and running them in my workstation would not
have allowed me to complete my research work in a reasonable amount of time.
I had been a Windows
user since I was a teen and the idea of interacting with a computer through a prompt like
MS-DOS instilled in me a sense of awkwardness. I just wouldn't know what to do with it
and also I was clueless about its usefulness.

My first real experience with the command-line was with Putty in Windows, for I had to
use secure-shell ssh to login to the Linux cluster. I remember spending a lot of time
walking through tutorials about using the command-line interface but for a while it
really did not have an effect on me, I was just trying to get my work done. At the
beginning it was a hassle in part because there was no seemless way to transfer files
between my machine and the Linux cluster, I did used a GUI based sftp client and then
also tried a command-line based client. As a consequence of that I started learning
my way with the command line in Windows as well, though I did not felt that the
experience of using it was great.

As time passed I eventually embraced the idea of trying Linux without
actually thinking that I would eventually switch entirely to Linux and never look
back. My first experience after installing Ubuntu was the feeling that my laptop
was unexpectedly more responsive and I really enjoyed that, it felt like getting a
brand new laptop with the latest specs without actually buying it.

I started learning to navigate my filesystem with the usual commands for listing the
contents of directories and to change the directory. At some point I tried to make
sense of things by consulting the man pages but it was tough at first though I had
the feeling of its usefulness I did not consult them as often as I should have. Later
on I started learning to write bash scripts and about useful commands like gawk, grep,
and sed. At that point I started to realize the usefulness of the command-line, I could
find files in my computer much faster either by recalling or guessing its name or by
using pattern matching on the contents of several files (usually plain text) in order
to determine what file had the info I was looking for. Only years later I learned that
some developers refer to this as the grepability of a codebase.

I am sure there's a lot I still don't know about Linux but what I have learned has been
a direct consequence of the work that I need to do so it has become an integral part
of my daily development experience. As time passes I keep learning more and more about
computers, and that's something that did not happen while I was a Windows user. I know
that there are legendary developers like John Carmack that have always done their work
in Windows and they don't see an advantage in working in a Unix-like environment like
Linux. However, there are a lot of other legendary developers like DHH that get their
work done in Linux.

Like I expressed at the beginning of my post, I am not trying to convince you to switch
if you are already convinced that you do best with your setup in Windows. However, if
you are just beginning to learn how to program I recommend you to try and keep trying
Linux because maybe it's part of your journey of becoming a software developer. If not,
at least you get to see the world through somebody else's eyes, and that my friends is
inherently human.

Commit message:

Matlab, Fortran, Make, and gnuplot
NOTES
talks about my experience of leaving matlab behind

linux/blog.md, after:

# Linux

In this post I am going to share my experiences about learning how to program in GNU/Linux
and why I think it is the best environment for that. Upfront I want to say that my
intention is not to express that my development environment is better than yours.
I have tried a couple of IDEs but they never quite left me satisfied. If you already
have invested a lot of time and effort to be productive in your IDE of choosing I
don't see a reason for you to switch to something else unless you wanted to try
something new for yourselft perhaps for the experience of getting an idea of how
other developers prefer to work.

I remember that when I was a student some of my classmates mentioned that software
developers prefered to write code in Linux, though I can only remember that not the
reasons. Around that time I was writing Matlab code in Windows and was satisfied
with my development experience, did not feel that I was missing out on anything.
I was able to solve the engineering problems that required the application of
numerical techniques quite fast thanks to Matlab's numerical optimization toolbox
mostly by using Matlab's editor and running the code by interacting with the Graphical
User Interface GUI.
For me it just happened that I had to learn Linux to be able to conduct
my research work in a High Performance Computing HPC cluster. The problems that I
had to solve then were larger in scale and running them in my workstation would not
have allowed me to complete my research work in a reasonable amount of time.
I had been a Windows
user since I was a teen and the idea of interacting with a computer through a prompt like
MS-DOS instilled in me a sense of awkwardness. I just wouldn't know what to do with it
and also I was clueless about its usefulness.

My first real experience with the command-line was with Putty in Windows, for I had to
use secure-shell ssh to login to the Linux cluster. I remember spending a lot of time
walking through tutorials about using the command-line interface but for a while it
really did not have an effect on me, I was just trying to get my work done. At the
beginning it was a hassle in part because there was no seemless way to transfer files
between my machine and the Linux cluster, I did used a GUI based sftp client and then
also tried a command-line based client. As a consequence of that I started learning
my way with the command line in Windows as well, though I did not felt that the
experience of using it was great.

As time passed I eventually embraced the idea of trying Linux without
actually thinking that I would eventually switch entirely to Linux and never look
back. My first experience after installing Ubuntu was the feeling that my laptop
was unexpectedly more responsive and I really enjoyed that, it felt like getting a
brand new laptop with the latest specs without actually buying it.

I started learning to navigate my filesystem with the usual commands for listing the
contents of directories and to change the directory. At some point I tried to make
sense of things by consulting the man pages but it was tough at first though I had
the feeling of its usefulness I did not consult them as often as I should have. Later
on I started learning to write bash scripts and about useful commands like gawk, grep,
and sed. At that point I started to realize the usefulness of the command-line, I could
find files in my computer much faster either by recalling or guessing its name or by
using pattern matching on the contents of several files (usually plain text) in order
to determine what file had the info I was looking for. Only years later I learned that
some developers refer to this as the grepability of a codebase.

Not long after learning how to run Matlab as a background process in Linux I realized
that my work was limited by the licensing limitations, had a fixed number of concurrent
instances. This motivated me to port my Matlab code to Fortran, a language created for
the sole purpose of developing numerical applications. That led me to discover the
open-source GNU Fortran compiler, learn about makefiles, and also find out how to
link my code to specialized libraries for matrix algebra such as BLAS and LAPACK. So
I had to learn how to link libraries to my code by searching on the internet and reading
the gcc man pages. I also remember digging info through tutorials because the GNU Make
documentation was difficult for me to understand at that time. I admit that I was in a
hurry and just maybe if I had spent a bit more of time on going through the docs my
experience would have been better, I admit that I just wanted to get to know the minimum
needed to get something done. Nowadays, there's not a single C/C++
or Fortran project of mine that I setup without a handcrafted makefile. I know that
there's CMake but I am so accustomed to working with GNU Make that I have never
felt the need to learn CMake. In the end I was able to learn how to compile my Fortran
code and link it to external libraries and in the process of doing that I learned from
first hard experience the difference in performance of interpreted languages like Matlab
and compiled languages like Fortran.

As my experience with Fortran grew I started to rely less on Matlab. At some point
I used Matlab only for plotting but my thesis advisor never liked the quality of the
plots that I was able to produce with Matlab and that motivated me to seek for an
open-source alternative. My advisor recommended me to use grace but it was GNU plot that
did it for me. And for the first time I felt the joy of being able to do quality work
without relying on commercial software.

I am sure there's a lot I still don't know about Linux but what I have learned has been
a direct consequence of the work that I need to do so it has become an integral part
of my daily development experience. As time passes I keep learning more and more about
computers, and that's something that did not happen while I was a Windows user. I know
that there are legendary developers like John Carmack that have always done their work
in Windows and they don't see an advantage in working in a Unix-like environment like
Linux. However, there are a lot of other legendary developers like DHH that get their
work done in Linux.

Like I expressed at the beginning of my post, I am not trying to convince you to switch
if you are already convinced that you do best with your setup in Windows. However, if
you are just beginning to learn how to program I recommend you to try and keep trying
Linux because maybe it's part of your journey of becoming a software developer. If not,
at least you get to see the world through somebody else's eyes, and that my friends is
inherently human.
